The Collected Teachings on the Bodhisatva
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisatvas! Homage to the princely Mañjuśrī!
Chapter 1: The Householder
This is what I have heard:the Blessed One once spent the rainy season in retreat at Śrāvastī.When the three months had passed, he prepared his mendicant robes, put them on, and started wandering the country againin the company of a large assembly of mendicants, 1,250 strong.The Blessed One was esteemed, revered, praised, and honored by monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen, by kings and ministers, by various followers of other teachings, ascetics, brahmins, and householders, by gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas.The Blessed One received a great abundance of robes, foodstuffs, materials for sleeping and sitting, medical supplies, and utensils.The Blessed One was greeted with elegant and generous words of praise:
"Such indeed is the Blessed One: He has reached truth, he is worthy of offerings, a fully accomplished buddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, he has reached bliss, he is a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide for those who wish to train, a teacher of gods and men, awakened, and blessed.He surpassed the world with its gods, the world with its māras, brahmans, ascetics and brahmins, gods and men, when he himself attained realization and accomplishment through superior understanding.He teaches the true Dharma, he reveals the holy life, excellent in the beginning, excellent in the middle, and excellent in the end, accurate in meaning and well expressed, simple, complete, genuine and pure.
It so happened that the Blessed One was travelling among the towns of the country of Magadha, and gradually made his way towards the great city of Rājagṛha.When he had arrived there, the Blessed One stayed at Vulture's Peak, near the great city of Rājagṛha.At that time, a merchant and householder by the name of Bhadrapāla was living in the great city of Rājagṛha.He had previously developed virtuous potential by honoring the victorious buddhas of the past.He was wealthy, with great riches and many pleasures, a great deal of property, many possessions and tools, much gold and silver, storerooms filled with great wealth and stocks of grain, an abundance of jewels, pearls, gems, shells, crystals, and coral, large stocks of elephants, horses, buffalos, cattle and sheep, and many male and female slaves, workers, and laborers.
The householder Bhadrapāla heard that the mendicant Gautama, who had renounced the Śākya clan and become an ascetic, was travelling in Magadha together with a great community of mendicants, 1,250 strong, that he had arrived at the great city of Rājagṛha, and that he was now staying on Vulture's Peak, near the city, and that he was being greeted with elegant and generous words of praise:"Such indeed is the Blessed One: He has reached truth, he is worthy of offerings, a fully accomplished Buddha, perfect in wisdom and conduct, he has reached bliss, he is a knower of the world, an unsurpassable guide for those who wish to train, a teacher of gods and men, awakened, and blessed.He teaches the true Dharma, he reveals the holy life, excellent in the beginning, excellent in the middle, and excellent in the end, accurate in meaning and well expressed, simple, complete, genuine and pure."
He thought to himself: "Now I should really go to see the ascetic Gautama.It is wonderful to have the opportunity to see those who have reached truth and are worthy of offerings, who are fully accomplished buddhas."So it was that the merchant and householder Bhadrapāla left the great city of Rājagṛha in the company of 500 householders in order to see the Blessed One.
In the early part of the day the Blessed One put on his robes, took his bowl, and led the community of monks into the great city of Rājagṛha to collect alms. He conducted himself with grace, going from place to place with eyes downcast in a graceful manner, moving his limbs gracefully, and bearing his robes and bowl with exceeding grace.The merchant and householder Bhadrapāla, together with the 500 other householders, saw the Blessed One in the distance, approaching them in a graceful and pleasant manner, with his senses composed and his mind at ease, supremely disciplined and tranquil.His senses subdued, with the dignity of an elephant,he was clear and shining like a lake of pure water.He was honored by a great many gods, honored by a great many yakṣas, honored by a great many men.His body was golden, with the thirty-two marks of a great being, and adorned with the eighty secondary characteristics.A great rain of flowers, a great flood of flowers, rained down upon him, and so he walked among a thousand billion lotus petals made of the seven kinds of jewels.When they saw him approaching in the distance with this display of many hundreds of thousands of forms of pure conduct, they were filled with faith in the Blessed One.Their minds filled with faith, they approached the Blessed One, venerated him by placing their heads at his feet,and sat down at one side.Then the householder Bhadrapāla, accompanied by the other 500 householders, spoke to the Blessed One:
"Blessed One! Gautama! You overwhelm this assembly with your glory.Blessed One! Gautama! You overwhelm this assembly with your radiance.Blessed One! Gautama! You overwhelm this assembly with your splendor.Blessed One! Gautama! You overwhelm this assembly with your brilliance.Blessed One! Gautama! You overwhelm us with your beauty.The body of the Blessed One Gautama is golden.The Blessed One Gautama’s body is as beautiful as that of the sage Aṅgiras.The Blessed One Gautama has no equal, in any respect.The qualities of the Blessed One Gautama are the most extraordinary and marvelous qualities in the whole world.Blessed One! Gautama! It occurs to me: What did the Blessed One Gautama see to make him leave his home and become a renunciant?"
Then the merchant and householder Bhadrapāla praised the Blessed One with these verses:
I had heard about the glory, fame, and splendour of the body of the Victorious One, but you are even more sublime in person, like an image in gold.Your body is graceful and beautiful. Because of your exalted, golden form you shine among the monks like the moon among the stars.Never before have I seen the crown of the head of the greatest among men, but now I see it rising up like Mount Meru, like the parasol of the gods, a sign that you have attained the highest degree of transformation.I see the hair on your head, delicate and supple, shining like a dark sapphire. Its soft curls twist to the right Just like the neck of a peacock.The best of speakers has a smooth forehead, your eyebrows shaped like rainbows. Between your eyebrows shines a perfect curl of hair blazing like the king of stars.Your eyes are exquisite, and delight all who look upon them. They are beautiful, beloved by those who gaze upon them. Merely observing is not enough for me, I salute the protector with immaculate eyes.The nose of the best of men is as magnificent as a golden horn, his lips coral-red like the fruit of the ivy gourd, exceedingly pure like a precious jewel.Your shining teeth are perfectly white, like lotus-root, cow’s milk, or a crane. Firm, whole, well set, supremely pure, your teeth are an ornament to joyous discipline.The Victorious One's teeth are well-spaced, the canine teeth shining spotlessly, like the king of the geese, flying first in formation, whiter than white, and completely pure.Like a pure red lotus, the color of copper, red like the rising sun, the color of a pure jewel, the Sugata’s tongue is delicate and smooth, and so long and broad that it can cover his face.I have truly never seen or heard of anything in the brahma-world, or in any human or divine realm, like the exquisite ears of Gautama. He has the jaws and the courage of a lion.By the power of the blissful one, I see his neck, his pure and resplendent throat, extracting the subtle essence of flavors, straight, not crooked, and centrally positioned. His sense of taste is unrivalled, like that of the god of gods and men.You are broad-chested, and your shoulder blades are round. Your seven supreme limbs are famed throughout the world. Blazing with the highest glory, the archetypal king, you are like the sun rising over the peak of the mountain.There are protrubrances on the soles of both of your feet, on both of your hands, and on both shoulders, and one protrubrance on the back of your neck. The fullness of your beauty is pure and radiant.The arms of the Blessed One Gautama hang down, like the trunk of the lord of elephants. With both of your hands, you are able to touch your knees without bending down.His mighty chest is like that of a lion. Broad, like the trunk of a banyan tree, his sturdy body is as strong and firm as that of Nārāyāṇa, With the strength that comes from forbearance.The hairs on his upper body curl to the right. They grow separately, and are very soft. They are unaffected by dust and smoke, just like lotuses in muddy water.Your male organ is said to be retracted in its sheath like that of an excellent, well-trained horse. Your well-rounded thighs are like the cores of bamboo. Your calves are well-formed, with the correct proportions.You have flat insteps and broad heels. Your hands and feet are finely webbed. Your long, smooth fingers and toes number twenty, with copper colored nails, like flowers.The symbol of the supreme thousand-spoked wheel shines from the soles of your feet. You do not put your feet down hard when you walk on the road. 1 You stride lightly on the earth.You tread softly, lifting your feet four inches above ground as you walk, O best of men! Jeweled lotuses spring forth wherever you set your feet. How extraordinary!You advance unopposed, undaunted, repelling your enemies, like an elephant, like a tiger, like the lord of the gods. You walk like nothing less than a hero. Imperturbable, you stride elegantly.Superhuman beings shower you, lord, with divine flowers. In the sky, they venerate you with the sounds of singing. Such magical displays are truly wondrous.Your beauty surpasses that of Vaiśramaṇa, your splendor is like that of a hundred suns. In the world of brahmans, of gods and men, you have no equal. Truly, how could anyone be superior?Having now seen this incredible miracle, I am filled with curiosity. What are the superior qualities you have seen, lord of men, that made you renounce ordinary life?The Blessed One then said this to the merchant and householder Bhadrapāla:“Alas! One who is involved with the world is tormented by the ten afflictions.What are these ten afflictions?They are the affliction of birth,
the affliction of old age,
the affliction of disease,
the affliction of death,
the affliction of sorrow,
the affliction of lamentation,
the affliction of suffering,
the affliction of depression,
the affliction of grief,
and the affliction of cyclic existence.
Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world is tormented by these ten afflictions, I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening, and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
He then went on to speak these verses:
I saw that all immature, ordinary people are trapped in the cage of cyclic existence, that they are tormented by birth, harassed by old age and disease.
They experience pain, they grieve. I left in order to protect those who are under the sway of death. I will free them from the cage of existence.
“Alas householder! I have seen the hatred caused by ten situations which lead to malice that make those who are involved with the world fight among themselves.
What are these ten situations which lead to malice?
They are the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I have been treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I am being treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “I will be treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one has been treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one is being treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my loved one will be treated unjustly”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy has gained an advantage”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy is gaining an advantage”,
the malicious intent that arises when one thinks “my enemy will gain an advantage”,
as well as unjustified rage.
Householder, it was in order to get rid of all malice, caused by these ten situations that lead to malice, that I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening, and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
Then, in order to expand on this point, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:
Alas, sentient beings relate to one another with anger, and all their malice stems from the ten kinds of malice.
“I or my relatives were treated unjustly, will be treated unjustly, are being treated unjustly.” This gives rise to malice.
“Those who are not my friends, are receiving benefits, have received them, will receive them.” This gives rise to malice.
Unjustified rage is the tenth way in which malice spreads. I saw all this, and then left behind the senselessness created by malice.
“Alas householder! I have seen that one who is involved with the world is lost in the thicket of dogmatic views and mistaken beliefs due to being ensnared by ten mistaken views and beliefs.
What are these ten beliefs? They are the mistaken belief in a self,
the mistaken belief in a being,
the mistaken belief in a soul,
the mistaken belief in a person,
the mistaken belief in annihilation,
the mistaken belief in eternity,
the mistaken belief that there is no action,
the mistaken belief that there is no causality,
the mistaken belief that actions have no consequences,
and the mistaken belief in false doctrines.
Householder, it was in order to get rid of all such views caused by these confused beliefs and mistaken ideas that I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening, and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
Then, in order to clarify this point further, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:
The idea of a self, the idea of a being, as well as the idea of a soul, these are the confused, mistaken ideas that cloud the minds of all immature ordinary people.
They base themselves on views of annihilation and permanence, the view of no activity. In order to establish perfect views I left and became a monk.
“Alas householder! I have seen that one who is involved with the world is pierced by ten great arrows throughout uncountable hundreds, thousands, millions, billions of ages.
What are these ten great arrows? They are the arrow of thirst,
the arrow of ignorance,
the arrow of desire,
the arrow of passion,
the arrow of hatred,
the arrow of delusion,
the arrow of pride,
the arrow of views,
the arrow of existence,
and the arrow of non-existence.
Because of these ten great arrows, householder, I decided to attain unsurpassed perfect awakening in order to get rid of all arrows, and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
Then, in order to clarify this point further, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:
There is no end in sight for those tormented by the arrows of desire. Blinded by ignorance they travel from misery to misery.
Taking hold of the skandhas they are tortured by the arrows of desire, consumed by the arrows of passion, stupefied by the arrows of anger.
They are bound by the arrows of delusion, swollen by the arrows of pride, fettered by the arrows of views of existence and non-existence.
All immature ordinary people quarrel among themselves. Saying “that is a lie, this is the truth” they argue with each other.
In order to remove these arrows the tathāgatas appear in the world. For beings tormented by these arrows, they are protectors and the ultimate refuge.
“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world remains conditioned by ten phenomena that spring from desire.
What are these ten phenomena?
They are as follows: because of desire one strives to obtain things,
and because of this striving one does obtain things.
When one obtains things one develops a sense of ownership,
and this sense of ownership causes one to develop firm opinions.
Such firm opinions lead to craving,
and this craving creates attachment.
This attachment causes envy,
which in turn leads one to accumulate property.
When one accumulates property one needs to protect and defend it,
and this causes suffering.
In order to safeguard their property, people use sticks and other weapons.
They get involved in quarrels, conflicts, feuds, and disputes,
and this leads them to make unfounded accusations
and to do many other such evil, unwholesome things.
Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world remains conditioned by these ten phenomena that spring from desire,
I decided to attain the unsurpassed perfect awakening that has no root or foundation,
and with that conviction I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
To emphasize that this is the way things are, he said the following:
Beings, swallowed by desire, everywhere perpetually strive to obtain things. Having obtained them, they make them their own, and then firm opinions take hold.
“This is what I will make my purpose” they say, and craving grows. When craving arises, attachment increases, leading in turn to envy.
Because of the vice of envy the world becomes thick with grasping. Because of grasping, one’s need to safeguard one's property grows incessantly.
Due to the need to safeguard their property the immature resort to sticks and weapons, performing all sorts of evil deeds, and then suffering escalates.
Seeing that it is from desire that all suffering comes about, I decided to awaken to the unsurpassed awakening that has no root or foundation.
"Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world errs in ten ways which doom him to error.
What are these ten kinds of error?
They are wrong view,
wrong intention,
wrong speech,
wrong action,
wrong livelihood,
wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness,
wrong concentration,
wrong liberation,
and wrong understanding.
Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world is doomed by these ten kinds of error,
I decided to overcome them all and fully awaken to unsurpassed perfect awakening.
With that conviction, I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
Then, to clarify this point further, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
Those who defend wrong views, who hold wrong intentions, who utter wrong speech, who perform wrong activities,
have wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness and concentration, attain wrong liberation, and are intent upon wrong knowledge,
these immature people who stand fixed among those doomed to error I shall establish in right action. It was in order to do this that I went forth into homelessness.
“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world sets out on the wrong path by way of ten unwholesome actions, and is certain to sink into the lower realms, to descend into the lower realms, to be borne into the lower realms.
What are these ten actions?
They are killing,
taking what is not given,
sexual misconduct,
lying,
slander,
uttering harsh words,
idle talk,
covetousness,
maliciousness,
and holding wrong views.
Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world sets out on the wrong path by way of ten unwholesome actions, and is certain to sink into the lower realms, to descend into the lower realms, to be borne into the lower realms,
I decided to leave all of these wrong paths behind and fully awaken to unsurpassed perfect awakening.
With that conviction, I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
Then, to illustrate this point in further detail, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
Beings who take life, who steal the property of others, and who engage in sexual misconduct, soon end up in hell.
Those who create discord, use harsh language, tell lies and are unreliable, these infantile fools, chattering continuously, are bound by delusion.
Coveting the wealth of others, full of malicious intent, holding destructive views, many men are led to the lower realms.
Three sins of the body, four committed by speech, three sins of the mind, these are the actions of evil-doers.
Having committed an evil act they go to the lower realms. I left in order to save myself, from going to the lower realms.
“Furthermore, householder, I have seen that, alas, one who is involved with the world is tainted by the defilements of major and minor vices in ten ways.
What are these ten ways?
They are the taint of envy,
the taint of immorality,
the taint of malice,
the taint of laziness,
the taint of distraction,
the taint of misunderstanding,
the taint of inattentiveness,
the taint of doubt,
the taint of mistrust,
and the taint of disrespect.
Householder, when I saw that one who is involved with the world is defiled by these ten vices, I decided to attain undefiled unsurpassed perfect awakening.
With that conviction, I left ordinary household life behind and became a renunciant.”
To emphasize that this is the way things are, he said the following:
No matter how much those in this world are tortured by the ten kinds of corruption, they still take joy in the various combinations of corruptions, and never grow tired of them.
All immature common people, defiled by the taint of envy, say “I will assume the training”, but are faulty in conduct and lack discipline.
Fools turn their back on patience, they are lazy and lack vigor. Their minds are fickle, and they are deluded by misunderstanding.
They lack reverence for parents, for elders, and for teachers, and even when they see the light of the world, the buddhas, the weak-minded still doubt.
They reject the authentic teaching, the profound utterances of the Victorious One. Tied down by dull skandhas they have no admiration for the noble assembly.
Having seen this corruption, I took no joy in anything conditioned and decided to attain cessation, the unconditioned, the uncorrupted.
“Furthermore, householder, I have come to know that one who is involved with the world is bound by the chains of destructive envy. O householder, I have seen that the vision of one who is involved with the world is clouded by the cataracts of ignorance.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world drowns in the moat of delusion.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is carried away by the waves of lust.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is wounded by the arrows of desire.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is enveloped by the smoke of wrath and hatred.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is ablaze with the fire of passion.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is drenched in the poison of anger.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world is encircled by the thorns of oppression.O householder, I have seen that one who is involved with the world loses his vigor in the forest of cyclic existence.Householder, when I saw that the vision of one who is involved with the world is clouded by these ten cataracts of ignorance, I was convinced to leave ordinary household life behind and become a renunciant.”
Then, in order to clarify this point further, the Blessed One went on to speak these verses:
The youthful grow old, their bodies crippled and disfigured. Memory, intellect, and decisiveness are taken away, and one is led through the door of death.Disease destroys one's power and vitality. It robs one of all strength and courage, and dulls all the senses. With fading courage, one is without protection.Death is like a ravenous rākṣasī, always hunting sentient beings. With its power it drags them along and drinks their precious life force.The world dreads death. It is tormented by disease. Seeing this, I left in search of the Dharma, unaging, undying, tranquil peace.The world is ablaze with three fires, and seeing no other protector for living beings, I vowed to become a protector, a refuge, to be a rain of nectar to quench the fires.Seeing that living beings have lost their way, without vision, blind and bewildered, I vowed to give eyes to the world. To show them the path, I became a renunciant.Deluded beings entertain doubt, dragged down and overcome by oppression. So I vowed to soothe their guilty consciences. To proclaim the Dharma I became a renunciant.People argue among themselves, trying to find each other's weak points, and being hurtful for no reason. So I vowed to reconcile the hateful. For the benefit of all beings I became a renunciant.Because of the strength of their pride, living beings have no respect for their mothers, their fathers, or the most precious ones. So in order to lower the banner of pride, I renounced the householder’s life.I saw beings overcome by greed, their possessions bringing on their downfall. Seeing this, I obtained the seven great treasures and vowed to free living beings from poverty.Foolish beings slay each other, whilst pointlessly trying to protect themselves. Seeing that this body must inevitably be discarded I left the three forms of existence behind.For the sake of those like you who lack understanding, who fill the threefold world, I became a renunciant, so that I might show them the way.I see the beings who have fallen into hell being tortured in agonizing ways, with no end to all their horrible states. I became a renunciant, their liberator.Seeing living beings fighting each other like animals, moved by compassion I became a renunciant, so that I might be a protector for those without protection.Seeing living beings oppressed by Yama suffering from intense hunger and thirst, I attained supreme awakening so that they might taste the sublime ambrosia.When I understood the human suffering of always wanting more, and the immortals’ suffering of falling into another state of existence, when I saw that the three worlds are pervaded by overt suffering, I became a renunciant.I saw that living beings possessed by desires have no trace of shame or modesty, that just like dogs or pigs they lie with their mother, their sister, with their teacher’s wife.Living beings are led astray, delighting in the pleasures of the senses, they are ensnared by women. Seeing the futility of the life of a greedy merchant, I abandoned my home and became a renunciant.Fools delight in the pleasures of the senses, and are overpowered by evil and discord. I overpowered all the demonic forces, and became a renunciant to reach the awakened state.When I saw all of this, this futile existence, and the thousands of evils that befall the house-dweller, I abandoned land and property in order to completely put an end to birth.
At this, the whole group of 500 householders was astounded, and they thought to themselves, “This must be the Buddha!" Certain that "This is the Buddha! This is the Buddha!”, together they spoke these verses to the Blessed One, as if with one voice:
Now that five hundred merchants terrified by old age have approached the Victorious One, please illuminate for us the supreme incomparable Dharma which puts an end to old age and death.Blessed One, completely pure and cleansed of birth, free from becoming, released from fear, destroyer of birth, please be our protector! Free the living beings trapped in this house of becoming!Hero, free from passion, fully liberated, impeccable, stainless, pure-hearted, skilled in training, peerless guide, release the precious rain of the immortal Dharma!Best of men, the exquisite beauty of your form is unparalleled. There is no-one like you on earth or in heaven, unrivaled, exceptional, without equal in this world, Sugata, greatest of the great, uphold the Dharma!You who have cast off the three kinds of impurity, pure in vision, the darkness covering your eyes has vanished. You who are free from darkness, dispeller of the net of illusion, free of the dust of the world, utter the matchless Dharma!All that live are defenseless against misery. Helpless, they fall into the ocean of existence. Victorious One, have pity, compassion, save them! Be quick! With the heart of a loving friend, draw them to the other shore!Bewildered by intoxicating conceit it is difficult to cross the river of becoming. Amidst violent waves of ever-increasing disease and strife, the living have fallen, and are carried irresistibly away. Call forth compassion, and pull them from the stream of becoming!You are a golden mountain. Your body is completely pure. Your radiance surpasses that of a billion suns. With a voice as pleasantly sweet as exalted Brahmā, speak the exquisite words of the supreme Dharma!All this Dharma which is naturally pure, naturally brilliant, pure from the outset, not proclaimed by anyone, cannot be heard from any other than the unmade maker, he who sees all.Worker of goodness, endlessly praised, spontaneously skilled in the ten powers, with a sky-like mind, of limitless wisdom, best of ascetics, most generous, please teach the Dharma!
It then occurred to the Blessed One: “These 500 householders are indeed ripe with the potential for virtue. I should therefore now teach them the Dharma so that they might all give up the guise of householders, become renunciants, and attain the elimination of defilement.”The Blessed One then took his seat on a throne floating in the sky,and at that, great joy, faith, respect, and wonder arose in the 500 householders in the presence of the Blessed One.The Blessed One then addressed the 500 householders: “Do you wish to be released from ten afflictions? What are these ten afflictions? They are the affliction of birth, the affliction of old age, the affliction of disease, the affliction of death, the affliction of sorrow, the affliction of lamentation, the affliction of suffering, the affliction of depression, the affliction of grief, and the affliction of cyclic existence. Householders, do you wish to be released from these ten afflictions?
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
What, then, is the bodhisatva’s perfection of meditation, by which bodhisatvas, great beings strive to practice the way of the bodhisatva?
Śāriputra, the bodhisatva has left desires behind. He has left evil, unwholesome qualities behind, and attains and abides in the first dhyāna, the state of joy and happiness that is born from aloofness, and that includes conceptualization and deliberation.
Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva, having stilled conceptualization and deliberation, with a mind which has calmed itself and become focused, attains and abides in the second dhyāna, the state of joy and happiness that is born from concentration, and that is without conceptualization or deliberation.
Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva abides in equanimity because he is not attached to joy, and with mindfulness and thoughtfulness experiences happiness in his body. This is how the noble ones see it. He attains and abides in the third dhyāna, with equanimity and mindfulness, abiding in happiness, without joy.
Then, Śāriputra, the bodhisatva, having rid himself of happiness, and of suffering, and having already put an end to positivity and negativity of mind, attains and abides in the fourth dhyāna, free from suffering and happiness, and with completely pure equanimity and mindfulness.
In this way, he practices meditation, and does not abandon the concentrated, completely pure, completely cleansed, unblemished state of meditative concentration where the secondary vices are absent.
What, then, is the bodhisatva’s practice of meditation? It is the practice of superior abilities and knowledge which he accomplishes.
----------
“What is a bodhisatva’s skilled approach to relying on things? There are four things bodhisatvas rely on. What are these four things they rely on?
They rely on the meaning and not on the letter, on knowledge and not on consciousness, on the explicit meaning of the sutras and not the implicit meaning, and on the Dharma itself and not on the person teaching it.
“Now, what is the meaning and what is the letter? The letter refers to involvement in mundane activities, whilst the meaning refers to a realization of the reality that transcends the world.
The letter refers to teachings on generosity, discipline, restraint, and contentment, whilst the meaning refers to teachings on being disciplined, on calm abiding, on what is not new and has no precedent.
The letter refers to the generally agreed-upon explanations of cyclic existence, whilst the meaning refers to accomplishing that which cannot be experienced.
The letter refers to the well-known benefits of nirvana, whilst the meaning refers to the state beyond constructions that is the complete nirvana naturally present in phenomena.
The letter refers to teaching according to the respective vehicles, whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge that realizes the Dharma of the single path.
The letter refers to the teaching on not abandoning any sentient beings, whilst the meaning refers to the purity of the three spheres of existence.
The letter refers to the teachings on disciplining one’s body, speech, and mind, as well as to taking up the training in its entirety, and the qualities of purification, whilst the meaning refers to the purity of unconditionality, not apprehending body, speech, or mind.
The letter refers to teachings on the destruction of malice, harshness, anger, pride, haughtiness, and arrogance, and on patient acceptance and gentleness, whilst the meaning refers to the attainment of a patient acceptance of the fact that phenomena are unborn.
The letter refers to teachings on all of the different ways of applying vigor with regard to the roots of virtue, whilst the meaning refers to vigor which is not based on striving after anything or leaving anything behind.
The letter refers to teachings on the liberative meditative states, and the attainments of concentration, whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge that lies in cessation.
The letter refers to the root of wisdom, which is the ability to retain all learning, whilst the meaning refers to the object that is beyond description.
The letter refers to the elucidation of the thirty-seven elements which are conducive to awakening, whilst the meaning refers to the manifestation of the fruits of these thirty-seven elements which are conducive to awakening.
The letter refers to the elucidation of suffering, [D171b]its origin, and the path, whilst the meaning refers to the realization of cessation.
The letter refers to the elucidation of the sequence which begins with ignorance and ends with aging and death, whilst the meaning refers to the cessation of ignorance, the cessation of aging and death, and the cessation of everything in between.
The letter refers to teachings on the prerequisites of calm abiding and insight meditation, whilst the meaning refers to the knowledge of awareness and liberation.
The letter refers to teachings given for those who act out of desire, anger, confusion, or a combination of them, whilst the meaning refers to the unperturbed liberation of the mind.
The letter refers to the elucidation of all obscurations, whilst the meaning refers to liberated unobscured knowledge.
The letter refers to expressions of praise of the unlimited good qualities of the Three Jewels, whilst the meaning refers to the attainment of the actual state which is beyond desire, and the unconditioned good qualities of the Sangha.
The letter refers to descriptions of the bodhisatva’s training and his development of good qualities, from the time when the awakening mind first arose in him until the time when he sat on the seat of awakening, whilst the meaning refers to the perfect awakening of omniscient knowledge which takes place in the space of a single moment of thought. In short, whatever is included in the teachings of the eighty-four thousand collections of the Dharma is what is known as the letter, whilst the object that cannot be expressed by means of any kind of language, any syllables, or any letters, is the meaning.
“What are the sutras which have an implicit meaning? They express the letter, and one should be careful to note that that is the way they present the matter. What are the sutras which have an explicit meaning? They express the meaning, and one should be careful to recognize that that is the way they present the matter. They are known as the sutras which have an explicit meaning.
“What about relying on the Dharma and not on the person teaching it? The implicit meaning is the meaning of the person, and it is not to be relied upon. The explicit meaning is the actual way of things just as they are, and this is to be relied upon. “These are the four things bodhisatvas rely on, and a bodhisatva, a great being, who is skilled in how to rely on these things practices the perfection of wisdom.
“What is the bodhisatvas’ skilled approach to the letter? The bodhisatva is skilled in two things as he practices the perfection of wisdom. What are these two things? He is skilled in consciousness and he is skilled in knowledge.
“What is consciousness and what is knowledge in this context? Consciousness refers to the four modes of consciousness. What are these four modes of consciousness? They are the position consciousness takes when it is involved with form, along with the positions it takes when it is involved with feeling, perception, and mental conditioning. This is what is meant by consciousness.
What is knowledge? It is a complete comprehension of the fact that the skandha of knowledge is not based in the five skandhas of grasping. This is what is meant by knowledge.
“Furthermore, consciousness is to be conscious of the earth element, of the water element, of the fire element, and of the wind element. This is what is known as consciousness. Knowledge of the unbreakable totality of phenomena, the knowledge that is not based upon the four elements, is what is known as knowledge.
“Furthermore, what is known as consciousness is the cognitive experience of forms which are recognized by the eye, it is the cognitive experience of sounds which are recognized by the ear, smells which are recognized by the nose, tastes which are recognized by the tongue, physical objects which are recognized by the body, and mental objects which are recognized by the mind. This is what is known as consciousness. Relying on the knowledge where the internal sense fields have come to rest and there is no movement towards the outer sense fields, where there is no attempt to reach anything, is what is known as knowledge.
“Furthermore, what we call consciousness is the conscious experience which arises from the object, and the conscious experience which arises from conceptions. This is what is known as consciousness. When there is no grasping, no conceit, no ideation, and no bewilderment, that is what is known as knowledge.
“Furthermore, consciousness relates to phenomena that are within the sphere of the conditioned, and consciousness cannot approach the unconditioned. Understanding the unconditioned is knowledge. “Furthermore, consciousness is based on arising and ceasing. That which does not arise, does not cease, and does not remain, this is knowledge.
“Which sutras are those of explicit meaning, and which sutras are those of implicit meaning? Those sutras that provide access to the path are known as implicit. Those sutras that provide access to the fruits of the path are known as explicit. Those sutras that bring out the relative truth are known as implicit. Those sutras that indicate the ultimate truth are known as explicit. “Furthermore, those sutras that deal with the processes of action are known as implicit. Those sutras that provide instructions for the elimination of action and the vices are known as explicit.
“Furthermore, those sutras that provide instructions that explain the corruptions are known as implicit. [MS124a]Those sutras that provide instructions for cleansing and purification are known as explicit. Those sutras that inspire weariness with cyclic existence are known as implicit. Those sutras that do not have recourse to a distinction between cyclic existence and nirvana are known as explicit.
Those sutras that teach by means of a variety of words and expressions are known as implicit. Those sutras that are profound, difficult to see, and difficult to fathom, are known as explicit. Those sutras that are greatly elaborate, in order to delight the minds of sentient beings, are known as implicit. Those sutras that use only a few words and phrases in order to inspire reflection are known as explicit.
“Furthermore, those sutras that use a variety of terms, such as self, being, life force, person, soul, human being, man, someone who acts, or someone who experiences, describing the absence of agent as the presence of an agent, are known as implicit. Those sutras that teach by means of emptiness, freedom from attributes, freedom from aspirations, the unarisen, the unborn, non-occurring, non-being, no person, and freedom from the three times, are known as explicit.
What is meant by dharma and what is meant by the person? The term person refers to when one is established in the view of the person and engages with a particular dharma. The term dharma refers to when one engages in the view of the person and is established in the dharma, dharmadhatu.
“Furthermore, saying, ‘a person, a common person, a common outstanding person, a person who follows his conviction, a person who follows the Dharma, one of the eight kinds of people, a person who is a stream-entrant, a person who is a once-returner, a person who is a non-returner, a person who is an arhat, a person who is a pratyekabuddha, a person who is a bodhisatva, a person who takes birth in the world for the benefit of the many, for the happiness of the many, for the love of the world, for the welfare, benefit, and happiness of a great host of beings, of gods and men, and becomes a tathāgata, an arhat, a fully accomplished buddha’—using the term ‘person’ in all of these ways the tathāgata uses conventional truth in order to engage with sentient beings and to teach them. It is said, though, that those who have any manifest attachment to these concepts have nothing to rely upon. In order to provide them with something to rely upon the Lord said, ‘Rely on the Dharma itself and not on the person.’“What, then, is the Dharma itself? It is that which is unchanging; that which is not a fabrication; that which is not created; that which is not modified; that which does not remain; that which has no foundation; that which has no root; that which is complete sameness; [D173b]that which is the same as sameness, the same as non-sameness, and the same as both sameness and non-sameness; that which is non-conceptual; that which is free from application; [MS124b]that which is definitive; that which is not attained; that which is the complete absence of anything that could be characterized as an autonomous nature. This is what is known as the Dharma itself.“Those who rely on the Dharma itself in this way, and who do not put their trust in the elements, have entered the door to the path of the Dharma. For them, all phenomena become just like the Dharma itself, and any phenomenon can then be used as a support. This is what is known as the four things bodhisatvas rely on, and the bodhisatva who is skilled in relying on these things practices the perfection of wisdom.“What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to accumulation? There are two things bodhisatvas accumulate. What are these two things? They are merit and knowledge. What is the accumulation of merit? It is the item of merit which is created through generosity, the item of merit which is created through morality, and the item of merit which is created through meditative cultivation. It is to remain in a mental state of love, and to get involved out of compassion. It is to apply oneself to all the roots of virtue, and to confession of one’s own evils and those of others. It is the item of merit which is created through rejoicing in all the roots of virtue of all sentient beings throughout the three times, of all those who are learning and who have no more to learn, of all pratyekabuddhas, of those who are newly committed, of those who are engaged in practice, of those whose progress is irreversible, of those who have only one birth remaining, the item of merit which is created through rejoicing in those who have committed themselves, the lords, the buddhas of the past, the future, and the present. It is the item of merit created through requesting the Dharma from all the buddhas and all the noble ones. It is the item of merit created through dedicating all one’s roots of virtue to awakening. It is to inspire the arising of the mind of awakening in all those in whom the mind of awakening has not yet arisen. [D174a]It is to teach the path of the perfections to those in whom the mind of awakening has arisen, and to collect material wealth for the poor. It is to provide medicine for sick, to treat them with respect, and to accept those who are in a wretched state with no hesitation. It is to not conceal one’s failings, and to confess what one has done wrong. It is to serve and revere, in many different ways, the lords, the buddhas of the present who have reached final nirvana. It is to respect the gurus and preceptors as spiritual friends. It is to search vigorously for the priceless, invaluable teachings. It is to show affection for those who preach the Dharma, and to still thirst to listen to the Dharma even after one has travelled for a hundred yojanas. It is to teach the Dharma without any thought of material gain. It is to serve one’s parents. It is to show gratitude. It is to be grateful. It is to have no regrets, and to not be satisfied with the merit one has accrued. It is to guard one’s physical conduct and not act in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s speech, and not speak in a hypocritical manner. It is to guard one’s mind and not think hypocritical thoughts. It is to establish monuments in honor of tathāgatas, which brings one as much merit as is possessed by Brahmā. It is to perform boundless acts of worship which lead one to attain the perfect characteristics, [MS125a]and to gather the accumulations of various roots of virtue which lead one to attain the perfect characteristics. It is to ornament one’s body with the absence of conceit. It is to ornament one’s speech with the relinquishment of all wicked speech. It is to ornament the mind with an unimpeded intellect. It is to ornament the buddha realms with acts of transformation by using one’s superior abilities. It is to ornament the qualities of the Dharma with the purity of knowledge. It is to ornament assemblies with abstention from slander, harsh words, and divisive talk. It is to ornament the Dharma of non-attachment by upholding the Dharma. [D174b]It is to contribute to the presentation of Dharma not being ruined, by offering encouragement which brings delight. It is to provide effective teachings by removing obscurations and hindrances, and by listening to the Dharma respectfully. It is to ornament the tree of awakening by offering groves, and to ornament the seat of awakening by not relinquishing the mind of awakening, the mind which precedes all roots of virtue. It is to purify birth and death by not objectifying actions and the vices. It is to have a hand of wealth by giving away all one’s precious valuable objects, and to make one’s wealth inexhaustible by increasing it through the inexhaustible act of dedicating. “He displays no angry demeanor, and so he enjoys the open hearts, smiling faces, and pleasant conversation of all sentient beings. He radiates the same light on all sentient beings, and so he attains the adornment of sameness. He does not leave those who lack learning in darkness, and emits an array of light. His morality and his merit prosper, and so his births become pure. He does not present arguments to try to excuse his failures, and so the womb is purified. He maintains the purity of the ten wholesome forms of conduct, and so he is reborn as a god or a human being. He observes all the guidelines, and so attains unfaltering determination. He is not a teacher who holds any teachings back, and so he becomes a lord of the Dharma. His motivation is pure and excellent, and so the whole world becomes available to him. He does not settle for limited forms of conduct, but places his confidence in the vastness of the Dharma. By not abandoning the mind of omniscience, he takes up all meritorious kinds of action. Impelled by faith, he perfects the seven kinds of riches. He honors his previous commitments, and so he does not deceive anyone in the world. He perfects the wholesome forms of conduct, and so he perfects all the teachings of the Buddha. This is what is known as the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to accumulation. “What is the bodhisatva’s skilled approach to the accumulation of knowledge? Knowledge comes about on the basis of a particular cause, and there are different causes and conditions through which knowledge is attained. What are these causes? [D175a]What are these conditions? They are: to have a strong desire to search for the Dharma; to follow a friend who has attained knowledge; to rely on the knowledge of buddhas, and not to rely on the knowledge of śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas; not to entertain any pride with respect to these things; and to have affection for one’s guru, to have affection for one’s teacher.